## 1. Introduction

When a data transfer is a pull transfer, the requesting data consumer (the client) may receive an access token in
the start message that must be presented to the provider data plane. Data Plane Signaling does not mandate the token
presentation type or refresh mechanism, as these may vary based on data plane type and transfer profile.

This profile defines a token refresh mechanism based on the OAuth 2.0 `refresh_token` grant type for use with Data
Plane Signaling. Specifically, this profile defines how a provider authorization server may issue client-constrained
refresh tokens and how confidential clients (dataspace participant agents) MUST authenticate when presenting a refresh
token.

Client authentication is particularly challenging in a dataspace context because a data provider will often not have a
pre-existing relationship with a data consumer. Consequently, the use of a `client_id` and `client_secret` must not be
assumed to be feasible for authenticating a token refresh request. This profile defines a mechanism for performing
refresh token authentication based on DCP identities and, in particular, Decentralized Identifiers (DIDs).

The key words “MUST”, “MUST NOT”, “REQUIRED”, “SHALL”, “SHALL NOT”, “SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, “RECOMMENDED”, “NOT
RECOMMENDED”, “MAY”, and “OPTIONAL” in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 8174]
(https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8174).

## 2. The Refresh Token

> This section is normative.

When PREPARING or STARTING a data flow, an `accessToken` MAY be generated by the provider's authorization server and
returned in the `DataAddress`.

This profile defines the following additional `EndpointProperties` within the `DataAddress`:

- `refreshToken` — OPTIONAL: An opaque string that clients MUST present when requesting token refresh.
- `expiresIn` — REQUIRED if `refreshToken` is present: The lifetime in seconds of the `accessToken` as defined by the
  OAuth 2.0 specification.
- `refreshEndpoint` — OPTIONAL: The endpoint address for the provider authorization server that handles token refresh
  requests. If omitted, the data plane endpoint address specified by `endpoint` in the `DataAddress` MUST be
  used.
- `refreshTokenType` — RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.

The following example of a `DataAddress` containing the above properties is NON-NORMATIVE:
           
```json
  {
  "dataAddress": {
    "@type": "DataAddress",
    "endpointType": "https://w3id.org/idsa/v4.1/HTTP",
    "endpoint": "http://example.com",
    "endpointProperties": [
      {
        "name": "authorization",
        "value": "TOKEN-ABCDEFG"
      },
      {
        "name": "authType",
        "value": "bearer"
      },
      {
        "name": "refreshToken",
        "value": "REFRESH-TOKEN-ABCDEFG"
      },
      {
        "name": "expiresIn",
        "value": "300"
      },
      {
        "name": "refreshEndpoint",
        "value": "https://example.com/authorization/refresh"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

The authorization server backing the provider `refreshEndpoint` MUST implement the OAuth 2.0 `refresh_token` grant
type as defined in [Section 6](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#page-47) of the OAuth 2.0 specification.

When a data consumer receives a `DataAddress` containing an `accessToken`, it SHOULD check if the `expiresIn`
property is present and if the token has expired. If the token has expired, the client SHOULD use the `refreshEndpoint`
to obtain a new access token using the `refreshToken` according to the OAuth 2.0 `refresh_token` grant type. The new
access token SHOULD then be used for subsequent data requests.

### 2.1 Sender-Constrained Refresh Tokens

The refresh token is an opaque string that MUST be constrained to the identity of the data consumer. When generating
a sender-constrained refresh token, the provider MUST bind it to the requesting participant using the latter's DID-based
identity as defined
by [DCP](https://eclipse-dataspace-dcp.github.io/decentralized-claims-protocol/v1.0.1/).  [Section 3.2](#3.2-provider-request-validation)
defines how refresh token requests are authenticated using a proof-of-possession scheme.

## 3. The Refresh Request

The client sends refresh token requests to the provider's refresh endpoint using the OAuth 2 `refresh_token` grant
type. A non-normative example is as follows. the bearer token is a JWT signed by the client as defined
in [Section 3.1](#3.1-client-authentication):

```
POST /token?grant_type=refresh_token&refresh_token=dFds4UOlH1QP7Fj3OkOAxM HTTP/1.1
Host: server.example.com
Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded
Authorization: Bearer eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9.eyJzdWIiOiIxMjM0NTY3ODkwIiwibmFtZSI6IkpvaG4gRG9lIiwiaWF0IjoxNTE2MjM5MDIyfQ.SflKxwRJSMeKKF2QT4fwpMeJf36POk6yJV_adQssw5c
```

Refresh requests must be sent over TLS/HTTPS.

### 3.1. Client Authentication

The client making a refresh token request MUST use the bearer tokens as defined
in [RFC6750.](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6750). The client bearer token is a JWT conforming to the
following specifications:

- The `kid` header parameter references the key material that is contained in the client's `DID Document` that can be
  used to verify the JWT.
- The `iss` claim is set to the client's `DID`.
- The `sub` claim is set to the client's `DID`.
- A `token` claim contains the access token associated with the refresh token.
- The JWT is signed using the private key associated with the key material specified by the `kid` header parameter.

The data consumer SHOULD support the newly issued refresh token rotation which might lead to revocation of the refresh
token in case of subsequent requests with the same refresh token. In that case the client SHOULD implement a mechanism
to prevent redundant usage of the same refresh token and instead use the refresh token after the rotation.

### 3.2. Provider Request Validation

The provider authorization server backing the refresh endpoint MUST verify the refresh request using the signed
client JWT following these steps:

- Resolve the client's `DID Document` using the `iss` claim.
- Resolve the public key specified by the `kid` header parameter in the `DID Document`.
- Verify the JWT using the resolved public key.
- Compare the client's `DID` to the `DID` the refresh token is bound to.

Authorization servers SHOULD implement the additional recommendations outlined
in [OAuth 2.0 Security Best Current Practice](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-oauth-security-topics#section-4.14)

### 3.3. The Refresh Response

If validated and authorized, the authorization server MUST issue an access token as described in
the [OAuth 2 specification](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-5.1). Note that the authorization
server may issue a new refresh token. Note that this means multiple data consumer requests must coordinate token
refresh attempts.
